an interview with Tom Rugg, conducted by David
White, Texas A&M University, on April the 22nd,
1989. Now,
we had stopped off with the spring of 1968 and Tet,
and you concluded by saying that you had definite
feelings at the time, but nothing really now,
correct? Well, it was nothing. I had no specific
recollection of what the Tet Offensive meant or
didn't mean to me at the time. I just don't recall
that now. I recall you said that you thought that
what we were doing over there was wrong. Was it just
our foreign policy was wrong, or did you feel that
how we were conducting our foreign policy was
wrong, or was it something else entirely? No, I
guess it was both.
I did not think then, and I have seen nothing to
change my mind in the years that have passed to the
present time, that we had any business in Vietnam,
period. However, the country often does things
that some of the people of the country don't agree
with. In fact, that's just sort of the nature of the
beast. If we were going to be there, then it was just
incomprehensible to me that the war would be
managed in such a way that we couldn't possibly win
it or achieve a military objective. And it was also
apparent that that was going on. So it really made
no sense. First of all, I disagreed with being
there, but if we were going to be there, then let's
at least let the military people manage the war in
such a way that they can achieve a military
objective, whatever the hell that was going to be,
if they wanted to own all of Southeast Asia,
whatever the military objective was going to be.
Let the guys who know how to achieve that objective
go and do it, and don't put artificial barriers on
them and tell them, well, you can do this or you
can't do that. That's where a part of all that
insanity of Agent Orange came up with. It was neat.
We can't fight a jungle war because we don't know
how, and we're not going to train or learn how,
apparently, so we'll kill the jungle. Well, it's
insanity, just absolute insanity. But that's the
kind of things that were going on.
You said that they should be free to... fight what
war they wanted to yeah if you're gonna if you're
going to
allow the country to become involved in a war then
first of all let's call it a war let's have the
congress declare war and let's let the military
people go win it if that's what the policy of the
country is going to be And I don't have to agree with
that individually that that's what the policy
ought to be, but if that's what the leadership of
the country says we're going to do, then let's
don't fight the war in such a way that we're
guaranteed to lose it and that we're going to
maximize our casualties and that it's going to be
as crippling as it can be, that it's going to go on
forever and ever with no definable objectives
being obtained or even being talked about such
that it tears this country apart internally. That
war went on forever. Incredibly long period of
time. With no popular support after we'd been in
the war for a while. You know, the Vietnam War
protest didn't start from day one. It's after it
went on and on and on. And our commitment to it got
more and more and more and more people were being
killed. and it became more and more obvious that
the war was being fought in such a way that it could
not be won, then lots of people started asking
questions like, what in the hell are we doing
there? I mean, that didn't start from the
beginning. That was a period of time. It was just a
total and mismanaged process. Now, had you been
president at the time, Just have withdrawn the
troops totally, or would you have let them go off to
fight their own war? Oh, I'd
have withdrawn the troops. Definitely. Yeah, I
wouldn't have had them there in the first place.
I'd have ended up where Richard Nixon ended up
after we killed a half million people and maimed
millions of others and put emotional scars on
people who never went there. Yeah, I'd have never
gone through that process. It was in sight. You
know, what has this country lost by not having a
military presence in Vietnam, and we haven't had
one for a long time? Nothing. We had no reason to be
there to begin
with. Talk about Richard Nixon. So you would say by
the, you know, 68 was an election year. You would
say that by the end of the summer you were beginning
to formulate opinions about who you wanted for
president, or were you even concerned about
voting? Oh, yeah. I don't think I've ever missed an
election. I vote in the local elections. In fact,
I've got to vote absentee. I'm going to be out of
town when the local elections come up here in
another two weeks.
Yeah, I was very much interested in who was going to
be president and not going to be president back in
those years.
And, of course, the main issue, I guess, was
Vietnam. Certainly, from my perspective, the
foreign policy was really the dominant issue
because of Vietnam. Were you inclined to lean
towards one candidate or another?
I didn't see, no, I really wasn't. There wasn't a
candidate around that I liked. You know, Richard
Nixon pulled out of Vietnam because there was no
other alternative. I mean, they were totally beat
militarily before they left. Nobody was
advocating that we pull out, which was my
preference. And ultimately what happened in
terms of our disinvolvement in Vietnam was
inevitable. It was just a question of who happened
to be in the White House when it occurred it was
going to happen. Do you remember Chicago that
summer? I remember the news accounts of it, and I
remember that it would have been a neat place to
have been. I would like to have been there. Would
you have taken part actively? Yeah, you betcha. I
really would have. I'd have enjoyed that. That
would have been fun. Did you look up to any of the
people who were eventually
quote-unquote charged with inciting the riot,
like... Hoffman or any of those other people? No, I
didn't have any idols that I followed around
during those years.
None of the names were important to me. It was the
issues. I didn't care about who the media selected
to be the stars or who the spokesmen were. It was the
issues from my perspective. For whom did you end up
voting for president that year and why? I don't
even remember. I honestly do not remember. I
really didn't feel that there was, I didn't feel
like it made any difference, that there was a real
choice.
And I can't remember who I voted for. In the fall of
68, did you notice any increasing activism on
campus or were you still pretty much apathetic?
I can't remember. I really cannot remember levels
of campus activity tied with any particular time
period.
Well, can you remember any specific protests on
campus? Not that I could give you details of. I know
there were some. Didn't seem like there was a lot of
organization in anti-war feelings. And there
seemed to be. Again, more organization out at
Lamar when we got into funds that were racially
oriented. I can remember a couple of pretty
good-sized demonstrations that involved racial
issues, and I really don't remember organized
sizable demonstrations involving Vietnam,
which is not to say there weren't any. There just
aren't any that I remember that stick out in my
mind. Were any of the racial demonstrations
linked to Vietnam over, say, the number of black
troops that were getting killed compared to the
white troops? No. In fact, I'm not even sure when I
became aware of the racial disparity in the way
assignments well, in the draft generally, but in
assignments particularly to Vietnam areas. I
know that, and it may have been after I got out of
college that I first became aware that blacks were
being assigned in disproportionate numbers to
the Vietnam War effort and were suffering
naturally as a result of that,
disproportionately high casualties. relative
to their proportion of the population in this
country. I mean, there's some pretty obvious
reasons for that. Would you say then that, in
general, the students down here were more
concerned with issues closer to home than some
more often in Asia? Yeah. See, I don't even
remember any big war protests cranking up after
the lottery system came out, student deferments
were going to be a thing of history, and if your
number was bad, you were up. And you would have
thought, if anything, that that would have
cranked it up, that that would have really started
the effort, the war protesting effort,
particularly for those who were going to be
targets of the draft and who had low numbers. But
those people just kind of disappeared. They went
off to war is what happened to them.
What were you doing in 1970? Were
you still in school? Oh, yeah. I didn't graduate
from Lamar until 1972.
Well, I spent six years in undergraduate school,
but I was a student most of that time and had
170-some-odd undergraduate hours. And because
you had that low lottery number and in French you
declared 4F, Yeah, the war, so far as me
personally, it was obvious that I wasn't going to
be able to go if I wanted to go. Even if you enlisted?
I couldn't enlist. 4F. 4F, you don't enlist
anywhere. I wouldn't go into the war. Now, just to
clarify, this is for the Army, correct? Well,
selective service, they were just drafting into
the Army. You had long lines of people trying to get
into more favorable forms of service. who
otherwise knew they were going to get drafted.
Such as National Guard or Navy? Oh, yeah. Those
people weren't having much trouble getting
recruits. The foot soldier was the guy who was
being drafted. If all had ever occurred to you that
if you had been drafted, you might have been sent to
someplace like Europe? Certainly possible, I
have. I had some friends who went to Germany and
Europe. During that time? Yeah. How did they feel?
I know some of them were happy to be in Europe and had
done everything possible within the workings of
the Army to ensure that they went anywhere other
than Vietnam. So they were quite happy with
themselves. Yeah. Well, people who are career
military tend to be fairly satisfied with the
Army, the short-timers. one-term enlisted
folks. You don't run across many of them who speak
glowingly of military service. But they were
certainly pleased that their duty assignment
didn't put them in Vietnam. Do you remember
hearing about the U.S. involvement in Cambodia?
Yeah. Cambodia and Laos both. And it seems like the
mayor will remember that the media made a a big deal
out of it. Of course, they'd like to do that anyway,
but they uncovered these excursions into Vietnam
that we didn't have the permission of, excuse me,
the incursions into Cambodia. We didn't have the
permission of the Cambodia government to be
there. It violated all sorts of laws and
international laws to go do things like that. and
the news media made a real big event of having
uncovered it. And, of course, the government, of
course, was denying it. The government had so very
little credibility with me at that point in time
that I could have written the scripts for them.
They denied everything. If it was bad, they denied
it. If it was good, they patted themselves on the
back.
Were you better at the government for lying to you?
I think disillusion is a better term. I don't then
and I do not now understand why the government feel
like it is necessary to deliberately deceive the
people who put them in power. I don't understand
that attitude. It is an attitude that some
political leaders are afflicted with. My view is
they tend to be concentrated in one particular
party. particular political bias that I happen to
hold. And I suppose it's not fair to make fun of the
Republicans who've had some unfortunate...
Don't go ahead if you feel that way. They've had
some people of unfortunate
character at the head of their party. People whose
character could not even be described as
questionable anymore. They were downright
dishonest. And I do not understand... why people
of power feel like it is necessary to lie, deceive,
and mislead those who've put them there. That's a
betrayal of trust which they've been granted, and
those kind of people are very disillusioning to
me. Because the political process does not
guarantee that that kind of person rises to the
top, you understand. It has happened. And it
disillusions people with the political process
generally, and it shouldn't because that's not a
necessary outcome of the political process.
So by the spring of 72, for example, you were just
feeling pretty much the government can go shove
its head in the sand or something like that? Yeah.
Of course, the spring of 72 is my graduation time.
I'm going to graduate from Lamar as a university,
first May graduating class after Lamar attained
university status, and I don't have a job. And the
prospects for getting one, well, I have a job. I'm
working at a job I could have had with a high school
education. I'm working in an automobile trim shop
and continued to do that job after I graduated. I
looked around a little bit, looked for some of the
jobs you could get with them. a business degree and
didn't really like any of
it. What were your feelings in 72 when the
elections came around? Were you satisfied with
what Nixon was doing? Or did you feel it was a crock?
Oh, I never did like Nixon. He was just not a
favorite of mine.
And still isn't.
Did you feel that he was doing a good job of getting
the troops out of Asia, or was he just doing what he
had to do in order to keep from losing all face? He
was doing what he was. We were beat. I mean, I
realize it wasn't necessarily being portrayed
that way, but they were leaving Vietnam. It was
either leave or die. Those were not good options at
that point in time. We were beat. We've been losing
the war for years. Sooner or later, you're going to
have to concede defeat. That's all that was going
on. He didn't deserve any pat on the back for doing
what he had to do.
It was long since past time to wave the white flag.
He doesn't get any kudos from me for doing what was
inevitable. Did he or any of the other presidents
do anything that ever got you thinking to say, hey,
maybe I better get out on the streets and protest?
Well, let's see. The last time I was on the streets
was when the Iranians took over our embassy.
No, I think
it. By 1972, it was time for me to start getting on
with my life and planning on going somewhere. You
know, the war was a dead issue by then, and it was
time to move on, time to figure out something to do,
some sort of a career to follow. So when the
Christmas bombings came in 1972, you just kind of
sighed in resignation?
I don't even remember that. I don't have any
recollection
of that at all. Except 1975, Vietnam fell.
What do you remember about that?
I remember, it seems like the news media had quite a
heyday with the panic scenes at Saigon airport.
And it seems to me that I recall thinking that it is
long since past time that we got out of there. And
that this is not gonna result in any great upheaval
or turmoil or chaos in the rest of Southeast Asia.
Unlike the people who were predicting the doom and
the eventual fall in the entire world as we know it.
we lost this little tiny thing called Vietnam. I
had determined before that that was just a bunch of
baloney anyway. Really very anticlimactic, I
guess, for me.
To digress a bit, you were in college during that
time. 75? No, no, no, no, no, no, no. 68 through 72
when we seem now to make so much about, oh, that was
the age of Aquarius and all this stuff that they
would call counterculture. What were your
recollections of that? I'm not sure there was a lot
of counterculture going on in Beaumont
from 68 to 72. That was something that was going on
out on the west coast, I thought. And that's That's
really about as close to that as I got. I wasn't
having to do it. There was a bunch of nuts out on the
west coast. So you'd say pretty much here that we
were concerned more with what was around us than
what was not around us. Well, no, I don't think
that's necessarily fair either. I think my
generation
was somewhat,
and this is true and was true generally everywhere
I was, is that my generation honestly did not trust
the generation above us, our parents'
generation, their leaders. That was true for me
and was true, I think, for a lot of people. The more
vocal and sometimes violent parts of that
occurred in other places and were media events.
But I honestly believe that my generation
genuinely did not, as a whole, and certainly
that's not true for everybody, but as a general
rule, genuinely distrusted and disliked the
generation that preceded us who was then in power.
And I think we could build a pretty good case for
feeling that way. Do you really blame Vietnam on
any one person besides, well, you seem to have an
insubordination towards Nixon. Are there any
other people or persons that you would single out
in your mind? No, Vietnam, let's see, that can't
happen. One person couldn't do a Vietnam. It takes
a collection of people in power, but it takes a
collective attitude on the part of a country that
really doesn't care and isn't paying attention to
what's going on to get you into Vietnam. And that's
why I don't think you've seen the repeat of that in
areas like Honduras, for example.
where at least in a geographical sense, it would
make a lot more sense to have an American military
presence in Honduras than Vietnam. But you don't
see that. And yet all you've got there is an
internal civil war, basically between
sort of democracy-oriented people and sort of
communistic-oriented people. And it's a
fundamental civil war we have going on. and one
that's the Vietnam story. And you can't blame any
one person for us getting involved in that. It's a
national mistake. I'm sure that the people who got
in there did not get into Vietnam thinking, boy,
isn't this going to be fun to have a national
disaster. Obviously, I think there were men with
good intentions who were wrong, in a country that
wasn't paying attention until when the country
did start paying attention, then it was a very
long, slow, painful process to get out of the
mistake we'd gotten ourselves into. What did you
end up doing after you received your
undergraduate degree? I worked for a year and then
enrolled in law school at the University of Texas.
You didn't view law school as any sort of
compromising any ideals that you had? Yeah, law's
a profession. You can do anything you want to with a
law degree. You don't have to be involved in
government. You can be a wild ass independent ACLU
type of person, or you can go to work in Washington.
The whole world is up until you were alone. If you
had been born 20 years earlier so that in 1968
you would be as old as you are now. You mean if I had
been born 20 years later? 20 years earlier. 20
years earlier than 48? That would be 1928? Okay. I
would have just missed World War II. Obviously.
Knowing having enough world knowledge as you do
now, meaning that in 1968 you were a fairly mature
person, law degree, fairly successful,
established practice, do you think you would have
felt the same way about the wars you did then?
Probably not.
As you get over and you get more established and set
in your ways, it tends to be a little bit more
difficult to get you stirred up and riled up.
But I can't say for sure. I know
the way I feel today, if someone were to suggest
that an American military presence in Honduras
was a good idea, you'd never be able to sell me on
that one. But that might be because of the Vietnam
experience.
I don't know. Very difficult times. You're coming
off of Korea, which was, I guess you could call it a
draw, but sort of this multinational exercise in
killing people in Korea. In itself, a very
interesting war from a historical perspective.
But you don't have a whole nation protesting your
involvement. It's a relatively short war and
results in, I guess, a more or less satisfactory
negotiated solution.
It's certainly much different than the Vietnam
result. So you wouldn't have in your own makeup a
historical perspective of what's going on. To a
certain extent, I guess you could justify the
Korean War involvement as a part of our
responsibility to the United Nations, which was
then and still is a pretty novel experiment. But at
least it gives countries a forum where they can
yell at each other. Do you think the UN should have
gotten involved at all in NOM? Run that one by me
again. Do you think that the U.N. should have been
called in in Vietnam?
No. Of course they couldn't because of their
system. The system, the way it worked, it wasn't
realistically possible for the United Nations to
get involved. They'd never gotten involved in
Korea. Russia hadn't got the red ass and walked out
of a Security Council meeting. They learned that
lesson. So there wasn't any realistic chance of
the United Nations getting involved in Vietnam.
You might have had a very much different solution
if that had happened. Certainly, you would have
had a little more collective military wisdom
involved, and you would have had a very different
political leadership involved as opposed to the
President of the United States, chief commander
of the war effort in Vietnam, you'd have had.
entirely different political setup out of the
United Nations, saying, you know, it might have
made a world of difference, but I don't think it
would have necessarily made it right.
You know, I suppose if these countries want to get
together and have civil wars, they ought to let
them do it. You know, we did one here. And the
country survived and rolled on. Vietnam has
survived and rolled on. Their political
leadership may be one that we've all been told
we're not supposed to like. But I don't know. They
work fine for them. If Vietnam, instead of being
some nation halfway across the globe, had instead
been some little island about 500 miles off
Galveston, do you think our attitudes would have
been any different? I think that might have
affected some people. But it shouldn't. We've had
Cuba 90 miles off the coast of Florida for a long
time. So the big fear is, oh, my God, the communists
will be too close. They'll be able to hit us with
missiles. Well, who are you kidding? They can hit
us from central interior Russia. So that doesn't
make any difference. No, it shouldn't make a
difference. It probably would for some people. If
there was one thing in your mind that you could have
changed about that whole era, what would it have
been? You mean me personally? You personally. Me
personally?
And then for the nation. Yeah, I don't know. That's
a tough one, me personally. I'm not really unhappy
with my life as it went through those years. I would
like to have not... particularly in high school,
have had to go to so many different high schools and
so many different places and constantly have to
start over, knowing no one, and have to start over
building new friends only to leave them all and go
on and do that again. That's not fun. I would want to
do that again, and I won't do that to my children.
I'll find a different line of work, although I'm
very stable now. What about for the nation? The
nation, they should have walked away from Vietnam
when they were invited. They just said, no, we're
not going to do that. The French couldn't make it
work. We don't think we're any better at it than
they are. You folks over there in that part of the
world need to sort this out on your own. I see. Well,
that concludes this interview. I want to thank you
for taking time out of your schedule. And again,
this is going into the... The Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
And that's it. Thank you very much. Thank you.